End to End Privacy Enabled Mapping System Problem Statement

Identifier Locator Systems like ILA, ILNP, and LISP are proposed as a revolutionary approach to enabling direct routing in the upcoming converged communication networks such as 5G core network (5GC) rather than using tunneling with GTP-U, GRE, (P)MIPv6 or similar ones. In addition to increasing packet overhead due to encapsulation that may cause fragmentation and all related issues typical disadvantages of (especially static end-to-end) tunneling comprise inflexibility to properly react to dynamic changes of end points and potential on-path anchors. Added complexity in case of multicast traffic and increased signaling for tunnel management are further drawbacks. Tunnels may introduce vulnerabilities or add to the potential for receiver overload and thus DOS attacks [draft-ietf-intarea-tunnels-08]. Finally without other measures as deep packet inspection optimization of paths according to network resources and application needs becomes complex. 
However, on the other hand, with the Id-Loc systems a mapping system needs to be established so that 5GC nodes can access the identifier and locator values of the destination given the source identifier and locator values to enable them to route the packet towards the destination. For mapping systems there will be a trade-off between scalability and rapid processing versus privacy and security of data. For example if a public distributed database such as the DNS is used then any node in the internet can query and track the location of the roaming UEs in 5G network which is not desirable. Similarly it should be avoided that any node can write new mapping pairs or ID-Loc bindings in such database. 

We will look into the currently proposed approaches to mapping systems and identify the gaps: 

1.	ILNP outlines in RFC 6748 locator and identifier privacy solutions. Source locator privacy can be preserved by the use of a Locator Rewriting Relay (LRR) on the path from the source to the destination, e.g. when a UE is in communication with a remote server. A LRR provides a mapping between a localised source locator value to a different locator value, e.g. a globally routable locator, re-writing the packet's source locator value with the new locator value. The LRR also handles the reverse path mapping to the source for return packets. For source identifier privacy, ILNP allows the use of any privacy mechanisms defined for IPv6 identifiers, e.g. ephemeral-use identifier values, ala RFC 4941, or (better) RFC 8064. For incoming connections to an ILNP node, the identifier and locator values are stored in DNS. For a 5G network, this could be an internal ("private") DNS system, only accessible via the provider. However, it would be possible to define other mapping systems from names to identifier/locator values, or, for example, from E.164 numbers to ILNPv6 NID/L64 values. In general, if the source identifier for a UE is known to a remote entity, there is the potential for communication packets to be linked to a node. If the source locator of a UE is known to a remote entity, there is the potential for topological (and possibly geographical) location of that UE to become known. Also, there are concerns on the write operation efficiency for DNS data store in the face of 5G level handovers.
 

2.	The LISP control-plane interface to the mapping system is defined in RFC6833. The LISP mapping transport system (LISP-DDT and LISP-ALT) are defined in RFC6836 and RFC8111, respectively. There is a MAP Server which is similar to DNS Server which publishes identifier locator values in a mapping database. The Map-Server receives Map-Register messages from the data-plane nodes so they can publish their mappings. There is Map-Resolver which is similar to DNS resolver which accepts Map-Request messages for the EID and returns the corresponding EID-to-RLOC-set mappings by consulting mapping database system in a Map-Reply message.  All messages defined in the control plane are UDP messages.
However, in LISP the identifier locator values are stored in data structures defined in the RFCs above. All read and write operations to the mapping system are authenticated with shared-keys using sha256 as well as ECDSA similar to DNSSEC.   With so much of DNS flavor, similar concerns on the efficiency of write operations and the lack of privacy support for a given identifier value exist. 

3.	ILA assumes a mapping system that contains identifier locator values but since ILA currently does not define any control plane, no other details have been defined. Privacy is addressed by way of UE changing its address regularly by using a block of addresses. It is observed that NAT can also provide address privacy but the use of NAT is discouraged in IETF. Also UE needs to reestablish connections every time it changes it address so it incurs delays which could be significant in case of real-time communication. Recently it was proposed to use LISP CP for ILA [draft-rodrigueznatal-ila-lisp-00]




We identify the following gaps:

The use of new type of databases known as NoSQL databases organized as Key-value stores or mapping systems. Such databases will provide very efficient read and writes unlike DNS. NoSQL mapping systems mostly support a message-oriented middleware system called publish-subscribe or PubSub. In PubSub, publishers are loosely coupled to subscribers and offer better scalability than traditional client-server systems because of parallel operation, message caching and network based message routing.

What is stored in the mapping system is limited to the identifier and locator values and no considerations to provide privacy of the stored data.

There are many privacy improving mechanisms defined like locator/identifier privacy of ILNP discussed in [1] above, frequent address changing, establishing and managing security associations between participating entities etc. Each of these techniques can be used by any Id-loc system. There is a need to standardize these privacy techniques in order to enable wide scale use by the end nodes.

